10 years to do my first three plate
bench press. Three plates in Australia
is 140 kg. That's not because that's how
long it takes. It's because I didn't
know what I was doing. And I'm going to
teach you guys what I teach the people
that I work with. And that's how to get
it roughly in about 2 years. So watch
this video and you're going to save a
whole lot of time with your training and
learn from my mistakes. Now, why would
you want to learn from me? Well, since I
got 140 kg, I then moved on and learned
how to do it properly, learned how to
train, learn how to program, learned the
lifting technique, and I got myself to a
250 kg bench press, weighing 116 kg body
weight. And that's going to be the first
thing that I talk about with your
ability to bench press three plates to
be realistic with your goals. So, what
do I mean? When you are a heavier body
weight, lifting heavier weights is an
easier task to do. So, when I say 140 kg
bench press, usually most of the men
that I'm working with that have that
goal would weigh anywhere between 80 kg
body weight up to 100 kg body weight.
What's that in pounds? About 170 to 220
lb. Now, if you're lighter than this,
you're kind of looking at a double body
weight bench press. And that's pretty
damn elite, right? So, if you're a 70 kg
lifter, male or female, and have 140 kg
bench press goal, it's possible, but I,
you know, I think that you probably need
some special source or some magic uh
magic juice or whatever they call it uh
to be able to do something like that.
But naturally, I think body weight is
something that's going to be what you
need. And and I would say 80 kg in the
first two years is kind of like at the
lower end. The heavier you are, the
easier that becomes. Now, what I'm going
to talk about is your progression over
the two years. The highest priority when
it comes to your long-term success is
lifting technique. So, if you want to
know how to bench press the most amount
of weight possible, you need to master
your technique. And I'm going to teach
you the technique that I used to bench
press 250 kg. Now, I didn't invent this
technique. I learned this technique from
my bench press mentor, which is a guy by
the name of Kil Sachev, who was formerly
the best bencher in the world, owner of
a 335 kilogram bench press. The
technique that I use is exactly
emulating his technique, and I'm going
to show you right now. However, this
video isn't a bench press tutorial. It's
teaching you the strategies to get
there, but I'm still going to give you
the technique. But if you want an
indepth tutorial of the bench press
technique, I'm going to put the link up
here and I need you to watch that. This
is what saved my life when it came to
bench press. Not literally saved my
life, but it's what allowed me to get
from my first milestone of 140 kg bench
press, which is three plates to four
plates in a much quicker time once I
understood the value of lifting
technique. So, this is what it is. Belt
not compulsory for me. I like to use it,
which I'll explain later. Now, the first
thing that I do is sit at the edge of
the bench so that I don't bump my head
on the bar when I lay down. So, that's
an important part. If uh you saw the
video of me doing the 250 kg bench,
you'll see that I look like I can't even
sit up. And that's because I didn't want
to when I finished the bench press, I
was here and I didn't want to stand up.
So, I had to shimmy down so I didn't
bump my head on the bar. Not because I
was so damn fat and immobile that I
couldn't get off the bench. But
important, sit at the edge of the bench
so you don't bump your head on the bar.
The next thing you want to do, so
[clears throat] lay back. The first
thing that I do is I slide back. The
reason I slide back is because I want my
feet behind my body. So if I didn't
slide back and I just set up where I
should be getting my feet back, I'm not
able to get them as far back as I want
them. I want to maximize that tension.
So the way that I maximize my tension is
to bring my whole body back so I can
bring my feet back a little bit further.
Now from here I'm up on the balls of my
feet and I push my heels downwards.
Okay, so that downwards initiates hip
extension. Okay, so that hip extension
[__] cramping in my back. Okay, I don't
like to hold that position for a long
period of time. So hip extension, feet
back, drive the heels down from here
with that downwards pressure. So there's
no pressure. I want to maintain that
heels down pressure from start to
finish. And that initiates my arch. What
I want to do with this arch is pair it
with shoulder blade positioning, which
is thinking about pulling my shoulder
blades back and down. So, feet back and
heels down like so. And then shoulder
blades back and down. From here,
it's
down and up.
So, there's a lot more detail to that
bench press, but that's why you need to
go and click on the link. And that
technique is going to save you so much
time. So, that's the absolute highest
priority when it comes to your long-term
success with your bench press journey.
Now, I'm going to be using that same
technique the whole way. And I'm going
to be warming up and I'm going to be
talking to you about programming
strategies. Yes. The next thing that you
need to be considering, and I don't want
to say it's in any particular order,
actually, even though I said your
highest priority is lifting technique,
another very high priority is having
healthy shoulders and being injury-free.
The moment you have joint pain or
shoulder pain or pec pain or some type
of injury associated with the movement,
it's going to slow down your progression
majorly. So, what you want to do is
avoid injury at all costs. And the best
way to do that is understand the lifting
technique, but also build strength on
every angle, front and back, and top and
bottom on every part of the shoulder.
And the way that you do that is make
sure you include a huge amount of
exercise variation. Now, of course, you
know, there's probably going to be some
really gifted athletes out there that
can bench press 140 kg in their first
year. Um, when I say gifted athletes,
I'm talking about if you are a lighter
body weight. If you weigh 140 kg, I'd
probably be able to get you 140 kg bench
press in a very, very short time within
the first year for sure. But I'm talking
about most of the average males that I
work with between that 80 to 100 kg
mark. Now, what I want to consider is
we're not going for the 140 in the first
year. So, one strategy is to just bench
press a lot. And of course I do believe
that that will work and it has worked
for some people is just pure
specificity. Just master that technique,
build the strength in in that single
exercise and you will get there
eventually. However, in my opinion, the
best way to reach your maximum
potential. So 140 kg I don't believe
should be your end goal. So 140 kg was
just a very small stepping stone in my
long-term journey. And something that I
like to say that I learned from Louis
Simmons from Westside Barbell, the
pyramid will only peak as high as the
base is wide. So what you want to do is
lay down the foundations. And this is
important for anything that you want to
get good at, whether it's a martial art
or any type of skill or or strength. You
want to build a base. You want to set
the foundations. And those foundations
come in the way of building a
structurally balanced shoulder
essentially. So I apply the principle of
structural balance in my entire body.
But when it comes to the bench press,
I'm talking about balanced strength,
push and pull, vertical plane and
horizontal plane and every angle in
between. So one principle that I follow
and I recommend for everyone that I work
with is to use a pushpull ratio of 1
one. So every time when I'm writing a
program or whether I'm training myself,
you'll probably see me, I'll superset my
push with my pull. It's just such an
easy way of getting twice the amount of
work in the same time. So instead of
just sitting down for five or however
many minutes rest between your sets and
and going bench press, wait five
minutes, bench press, you go bench
press, wait a couple of minutes and go
and do a row pattern or a pull down
pattern. So that's a great way of of
always balancing out your push with your
pull and and making sure that there's
equal strength and muscularity on the
pushing muscles to the pulling muscles.
However, I'm not just talking about the
bench press and the pull. I'm talking
about pressing on all angles. So in the
first year, the goal, of course, we want
to get as strong as possible, but the
goal that I'm teaching you is not to
bench press that 140 kg or not consider
that the end goal. Lay the foundations.
And the best way to lay the foundations
is to include as much variation as
possible. So variation means lots of
different angles. So joint angles, grip
positions, uh you know, alternating
between barbells and dumbbells. So we
think we're building the base. That's
the bottom of the pyramid. And then as
we get closer and closer to the peak,
we're calling that first peak is 140 kg.
That's when we start. So it's more
varied in the beginning of the long-term
plan. And then gradually gradually we
become more specific and less varied. So
at the end of the long-term plan, I'm
going to tell you to use a little bit
less variation and be a little bit more
specific. But for now, the first year,
the first 12 months of your journey to
the three plate bench press, I recommend
as much variation as possible. And this
is how you do it. I'm using the maximum
legal width grip in a bench press
competition, which is the index finger
on the outer ring of that powerlifting
bar. You're not allowed to go wider than
that in competition. So that's as wide
as I teach it.
Now the next point that I want to talk
about is lifting frequency. So, I'm
talking about building your base now and
how I want you to build an equal amount
of strength and muscularity all around
every single push and pull angle,
vertical, horizontal, and everything in
between. So, the way that we do that is
we think about training frequency. In my
opinion,
the best frequency when you're on your
journey to benching the most amount of
weight possible is three times per week.
So, currently I bench press two times
per week, but that's because I'm at a
different end of my journey. I'm a lot
stronger now and the weights that I'm
lifting need a little bit longer time to
recover. But getting to that point, I
was able to do a lot more frequency and
understanding how many times a week is
optimal for building your pushing
strength is pretty important. And I
believe that three sessions per week is
the best way. Now, that doesn't mean
three bench press sessions per week.
That means three pressing sessions per
week. And every time I do a press
session, I'm pairing it with the
corresponding or the opposite movement
pattern, which is a pull. So, three
times per week of push and pull. Now,
you might be thinking, where does lower
body come into this, you know, and that
depends. Some people just want to
specialize in bench press, but I'm going
to teach you like I'm a powerlifter and
I'm pretty good at squatting. I'm okay
at deadlifting. And I emphasize those as
well. So, I have a balanced approach to
my entire training and I usually have,
you know, a 50/50 split. So, half of my
training is upper body and half of my
training is lower body.
And the more other exercises you want to
include, the harder it is to achieve top
end at one specific movement. So, if
you're a bench press specialist,
technically you don't even need to train
lower body, but I don't usually train
people that are purely bench press
specialists. Of course I have. But I'm
going to talk about Kil Sachev. That's
the person that, you know, inspired me
to use this technique in this style of
training. Kill Sachev. He bench pressed
335 kg. But he's also the owner of a
400, I think even 410 kg. Very rarely he
does whole powerlifting meets, but I
believe he squatted somewhere around,
you know, 300, so 800 lb, so 365 kg with
with sleeves. And he's known as a bench
press specialist. And when I spoke to
him about his lower body training, he
told me that he trains two times upper
and two times lower. So even during his
bench press preparation, he still
included his lower body training.
However, when you're competing, you just
have to understand we prioritize as we
get closer to competition. And when he
was competing for his 335 round bench
press, there's no doubt about it. He
would have reduced his volume and his
intensity on his lower body training. So
as you get closer to competition, you do
less and less of the other stuff. But in
your off season, you can still balance
out your training and still have lower
body work, which I highly recommend. So,
I'm not talking about your whole
program. All I'm talking about is bench
press. I recommend three times per week.
And I also recommend you do not neglect
your lower body training. Three times a
week. How would I split that up? In the
first year, I like to consider three
main pressing angles. Flat, which is
something that I would recommend if
we're getting wanting to get good at
this specific skill. you don't stop
practicing this specific skill. But
because we're laying down our
foundations, all you need to do is once
per week of this bench press technique.
The other two sessions is where I
recommend the other two angles, which is
incline bench press and overhead barbell
press. So, making sure that we have
vertical push strength, incline push
strength, flat push strength, of course,
the opposing pull pattern as well is
where you need to focus in the first 12
months.
By the way, 100 kg the first two plates.
I've made a video about that as well. Uh
maybe I'll put a link here as well. You
can attach that. And that is a lot
easier. You can do that in the first
year and even [snorts] less. And uh it's
it's quite easy. But the bigger the
goal, the harder it is to get to
obviously. And you know, the first 100
kg is a lot quicker. The next plate. So
that's two plates. The next plate takes
a little bit longer. But the first plate
very, very easy. up.
>> No, not for this one. Maybe the next
one.
The way that I would set it up is with
your frequency of three times per week.
Once is this exact technique that I'm
teaching you. The other two sessions are
going to be
without an arch. So you see me using
that arch and that is absolutely
reducing the range of motion. It's a
skill. It's improving my levers and it's
allowing me to shift the heavy load. And
some of you may consider that a cheat
technique. It's not because it's allowed
in competition. So it's not a cheat at
all. And if you use that exact technique
that I'm showing you, [panting]
some federations don't allow this foot
position. Some you need a flat foot
position, which is a pretty easy
transition. All you need to do is slide
your feet forward and have your feet
flat. But it's the same setup. But
because that's a lever, and we're
intentionally reducing the range of
motion by arching our back, pulling our
shoulders back, and using a wider grip.
My recommendation is for the other
exercises, the incline press and the
overhead press, you don't need to
consider arching or reducing the range
of motion. The idea of those ones is to
increase the range of motion. So the
bench press, I consider that to be the
ego lift, which means yes, you should
take pride in how much weight is on the
bar. Of course, do the movement
properly, but that's where I want you to
push the heaviest loads. The overhead
press, full range of motion. The incline
press, full range of motion with a
closer grip position. So, you know,
close to mid-grip and vary those for the
first 12 months when you're doing your
three sessions of bench press per week.
I know people are going to ask what is
the split? So, the more spaced out the
better. So, obviously I don't recommend
you bench press or you press Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday and then have four
days off. Space them. So, logically, so
it's either Monday, Wednesday, Friday or
even like Monday, Thursday, Saturday,
something like that. So, as much rest in
between those three days as possible,
and that's where you'd slot in your
other lower body sessions. The next
question you're going to ask is what
reps, what intensity, how do we do that?
And that's a really good question. And
lucky for you, here's another link for
an entire bench press guide where I've
given you the entire long-term
periodized plan, which I believe is a
12week program. But I want you to
understand that it's something that's
not going to happen in the first 12
weeks. So, this is where we need to
consider exactly what the goal is. All
rep ranges are good. You're going for a
one rep max on 140 kgs, but it doesn't
mean that all you do is one rep to get
there. We need to do high reps, moderate
reps, low reps, and then the singles as
well. And the way that I would do that
is I'd split that up. You could say 12E
blocks or 16 week blocks, multiple ones
of those blocks over the years. And the
way that I would structure it is very
first phase, we start with high reps. So
what's high reps? Let's call it eight to
10. And you can do a four to four to 8
week phase of that. Then the next phase
you can do sixes. Six to eight. Continue
that for four to eight weeks. And then
the next phase we do four to six and we
continue that for four to eight weeks.
And then the last phase we can peak our
strength. So that's a 16 that's an
example of a 16we block where we're
going from high reps and strategically.
Sorry I said 16. That's if we're four
week blocks, but it could be a lot
longer. We're strategically going from
high reps to moderate reps to low reps
to peak. And then we repeat that cycle.
So that's the reps that we use. And if
you click on that link, then you're
going to have a look at how I lay it
out. The next thing I need you to
consider is if we're doing that
four-weekly plan, like how hard do we
work? So, the problem that a lot of
people encounter, especially like myself
when I first started, and this was one
of the biggest mistakes that I made was
wanting it so bad that I' I'd push as
hard as I could for every single time I
came into the gym. How hard would I
train? To be honest with you, I would
train to failure every time. And I
always, especially when I first learned
how to bench press two plates aside, I
would come into the gym and that was my
goal, at least two plates. Then I'd have
my spotter and I'd do however many reps
by myself and I would make my spotter
performce repetitions or spot me for an
extra couple of repetitions. And that
was one of the dumbest things that I
could ever do. It was like there was no
progression. Every week it was the same
amount of reps. I always had shoulder
pain right in the front of my shoulders
because I wasn't arching. I didn't
understand the right lifting technique.
And I prioritized not only benching, but
looking like a hero and making sure I
had a minimum amount of weight every
time I came into the gym. And that's
like, who cares? I'll tell you right
now, if it's less than three plates, no
one cares. Even if it's more than three
plates, no one really cares except for
you. Everyone's on their own journey. So
don't come into the gym and think that
you have to have a certain amount of
weight on the bar, otherwise people are
going to judge you negatively. No one
gives a [__] So, what you want to do is
not train to fail every single time you
come into the gym. And I have another
strategy for that, [clears throat] which
is the way that I the way that I call it
is periodizing effort. Periodizing
effort means you don't train as hard as
you can every time you come into the
gym, but you're strategic with how often
you push hard and how often you hold
back. And the way that I do that is over
my four-week blocks. So, when I set up a
four-week block over four weeks, my week
one is my conservative week. I always
start my new phase with lower loads and
lower proximity to fail. So that means
don't push as hard. It's an easier day.
And the reason it's easier is the same
reason you would start a marathon with a
conservative pace and not sprint at the
start of the race is because you're
trying to save energy so that you can
have a successful entire race. Same
thing with the first week of your
long-term plan is you start conservative
to allow room to improve every single
time you come into the gym as well as
allow your body to understand the
demands of the entire program. So when
you're starting on week one of a new
program and you want to push as hard as
you can and take it to fail, you've got
accessory exercises after that and then
we've got other exercises and other
other days of the week that we need to
train and have recovery for. So starting
conservative allows us to understand the
demands of the entire week so that we
can look at week number two and
understand okay great I can now progress
in whatever the logical increment. So we
start conservative on week number one
and allow room to be able to progress
every time you come into the gym. The
way that I consider that is over a
four-week plan RP7
as a program average which you could
loosely explain that as three
repetitions in reserve across the board.
And then the next week we go to RP8 or
two reps in reserve, RP9. And then on
the fourth week of every four-week
phase, we work towards kind of hitting
our limit. So it's not as if you should
always train to fail or never train to
fail. It's a strategy to sometimes
training to fail intelligently and
strategically. So we get an
understanding of what those weights feel
like and have a few weeks of practice.
So, in this case of a four-week plan,
we've got three great weeks practice of
pushing our body slightly harder and
harder so that on week four of every
phase, we can push it to, you know,
maybe fail or as close to fail as
possible. Next set, 120.
Very nice. Unrackck, Mustafa.
Very nice indeed.
Next set is three plates. I'll probably
go heavier than that today, but that's
going to be the next step.
>> I realized um when you do RP 7, 8, 9,
10.
>> Yeah.
>> The next week of the first phase, it's
kind of del.
>> Really great point. So, D loss. So
that's
something that a lot of people talk
about with whether you should de lo or
not. Now I believe the answer to that is
the same as whether you should train to
fail or not. It's like yes sometimes but
not all the times. And actually if
you're in the first year of your
training, you probably don't really
deserve to de lo. So this kind of has a
bit of a de lo strategy built in. So
that week one of every phase by the way.
So when I said it's uh the conservative
week on week one and then you go
slightly harder and the hardest week is
on week four then we start on the
conservative week of the next phase. So
every time we start with that
conservative week it's a bit of an
inbuilt de lo. So in the first 12 months
I say you need to load before you de lo.
So the idea of a D lo is a strategic
bout of recovery
because if we've done a really great
hard you know f you know few weeks of
training then we've accumulated a lot of
great work but we've accumulated a lot
of fatigue and this is where it's
strategic to have some type of a
strategy in place where we reduce
the effort.
There's a few ways of doing that. we
reduce the effort somehow so that we can
allow for some type of a recovery. But
in my opinion, the first year of your
training, I don't think you're pushing
hard enough to need a specific planned
de lo week. So that's as de lo as it
gets is week one of every phase. So I
will go a little bit further into this.
As you get stronger and stronger and you
may come to a point where the weights
you're lifting are quite heavy and it's
not just about bench press, we're doing
whole [snorts] body as well. We're doing
squat sessions and deadlift sessions
which contribute to that overall
systemic fatigue. And this is where
after about a year as we're approaching
a year and plus of our training, if
you're taking your training seriously,
you are going to be accumulating a lot
of good volume and a lot of intensity
and a lot of effort and a lot of
fatigue. And that's where we need to
change our D load strategy. The first D
load strategy is a reduction in
intensity on week one of every phase.
The next strategy is to add a reduction
of volume as well. And the way that I do
that is on week four of week four if
it's a four-week program. So the final
week of every program where I'm pushing
the heaviest weight, I will de lo by
reducing the volume by cutting the
amount of sets we're doing in half. So
instead of doing like four sets of five,
we do two sets of five.
Watch this. Someone asked me before if
I'm cheating my range of motion because
I'm not locking my elbows out. Who was
that, Must asked me? Was that you? Could
have been. Now, something that I Look at
this. My lat is the target muscle here,
not the bicep. So, you know, extending
my elbow is one thing, but the idea is
when I do my lat pull downs, I'm kind of
feeling the stretch in my my lat, my
entire shoulder girdle is at its full
stretch. Just because I haven't locked
out my elbow, doesn't mean I'm not
taking the lat, which is the target
muscle, to the full range of motion. So,
this is kind of like the feel that I
get. It's just my own little thing. I'm
not saying that it's wrong by locking
the elbow. All I'm saying is once you
get a feel for the exercise, I'm
actually trying to eliminate my arms
when I'm doing this. And it's kind of
placing all the focus here on the lats.
So now you know
I did last two.
>> I did exactly as you did.
>> Did you feel it in the lats?
>> Felt that.
>> You felt it in the lats, right? You got
to understand the priority. And you
know, to be honest with you, when I'm
teaching someone these techniques, I
just say if in doubt, just take it to
the full range of motion. So I teach
people lock stretch like like take
everything to as deep as your mobility
allows. So that's you know from here I'm
hanging my elbows are locked and my
shoulders are are hanging right. So
that's the full range of motion and
there's no question but you know for me
it's like
you know for me I'm I'm just going by
feel and I'm feeling there's a a stretch
in the lat. I don't care how many reps
I'm doing. All I'm thinking about is the
stimulus on the muscle. I'm taking the
that muscle to what I believe is
sufficient stretch and a sufficient
contraction. And I keep on doing that up
until the point where I've got no more
repetitions in reserve. And that's the
difference between training for
bodybuilding or training for hypertrophy
and training for strength. I'm trying to
stimulate muscle growth in that specific
muscle, which is the lat. If I was
training for strength, I want to take
all my joints through the fullest range
of motion to the full contraction and
repeat. So, the first time I bench
pressed 140, [clears throat] actually I
wasn't using a wide grip. So, that's the
grip position that I use now. But when I
first started, um, my my grip position
was thumb to the line. And that's
something that I've learned is although
using a wider grip shortens the range of
motion, it also positions the pec in in
a more stretched position. And the more
stretched the muscle is, the weaker the
contraction is, unless of course you
train it. So in my opinion, it takes
time to condition the muscle to be able
to contract maximally at a longer
stretch, right? So a lot of the times I
would say in your first year, you don't
have to go as wide as possible. Start
with it slightly closer. You may feel a
little bit uncomfortable or weaker if
it's wider. So, don't look at your
favorite bench presses or the world
record holders that use a really wide
grip and say, "Therefore, it must be the
strongest." I'll tell you now, a lot of
those people have spent a lot of time
conditioning their muscles and building
the strength of the shoulder and the pec
so that they can hold it out wider. But
it took me actually the first 140 kg
bench was thumb to the line. And it was
only until I got to about 180 or 190
that I was able to. So I kind of like
gradually gradually like one finger at a
time per phase. So one fing so pinky on
the line and then ring finger on the
line then rude finger on the line then
nose picking finger on the line which is
the maximum legal width grip.
So don't just think you need to go
maximum grip from the beginning. In fact
I don't recommend it. It's something
that you have to work to and that's
developing or conditioning the stretch
sorry the strength of the muscle in the
fully stretched position. All right. But
now I am at that point where I can I am
quite strong with the widest legal grip.
So 140. This is the weight. That was a
perfect unrackck by the way. Must
do. Same with my bench. The way that I
press isn't like a full lock. full range
of motion if it's in competition and of
course you've got no choice touches the
chest. So in competition
the way that it works is they'll say bar
loaded at 140 kg for whoever the lifter
is for Sebastian or so. So I'll come out
and the ref is standing behind with
their arm up in the air and I'll come in
get in position and then I'll unrackck
the weight and then I wait here for the
ref to give the down command. They'll
say start.
And then the rule here isn't that you
must pause, you must make the barbell
motionless. And once the barbell is
motionless, you will then get the press
command. So if you are shaky, which a
lot of people are because you're doing a
max weight and it takes a long time for
that bar to settle and be completely
motionless,
the ref will take their sweet old time.
And it's not that the ref usually likes
to wait a long time. It's that you're
not keeping the barbell still. So your
objective is to make it so learn that
skill of keeping that barbell as still
as possible. For me, the best strategy
for doing that is a heavy pause where I
sink and kind of like rest the whole
weight of my barbell on my chest, which
is another skill that you need to learn.
Some people prefer a light pause. In
fact, I would say that most people when
they're learning prefer a light pause.
But either way, that's one of the
biggest reasons why I use a belt because
I hold my breath for the set and when
I'm when I have a full body brace and a
full breath hold and a belly full of
air, the barbell won't sink as low. My
body is a lot firmer and the barbell
won't sink that far into my chest, which
is a big reason why I like to hold my
breath and use a belt for the bench
press. So, you you pause it. So you
bring it down to your chest until the
bar is motionless and then the ref will
give the press command. Boom. Lock it
out. So full lock. If it's a partial
lock out, they're not going to say rack.
So once you get a full lockout, they say
rack. Now that's the rules in a bench
press competition. The way that I train
is all about shoulder position. So same
with the lat pull down where I'm kind of
just feeling the stimulus in my lat.
Same thing with my bench press. I'm kind
of maintaining. So, this [clears throat]
was a position that I said um I'll talk
more about. It's the bottom position of
a lat pull down. So, come and check the
lat pull down. What I want to do with my
shoulders in a bench press is a thing
called retraction and depression. Right?
So, shoulder blade elevation depression.
Right? So, this is where my shoulder
blade is depressed. It's downwards. And
then retraction is inwards. Protraction
is outwards. Protraction is when the
scapulas or the shoulder blades slide
around the rib cage to get my arms out
in front. But I want my arms out to the
side and I want my shoulder blades back
to be able to do that. Just like I'm
about to show you in a lat pull down. So
check this out. The position in in from
start to finish is in here. It's here.
Bang. That's the position. That's the
position that I want you in in a bench
press. So it's back and down. And then
same shoulder position as a lat pull
down which is back and scaps back and
down or the entire think about bringing
your whole shoulder girdle back and down
towards your back pockets and press the
heavy barbell off your chest. And that's
the technique. As I was saying, [snorts]
it's for me right now, it's the feeling
of my lat. So I go shoulder girdle,
elevate all the way and fully stretch
the lat. I don't need to lock my elbow
to do that. I can, but
I feel that it's more tension on the lat
the whole time. When I do it like this,
next up, let's go a little bit heavier.
>> [panting]
[snorts]
>> Okay, now I'm going to talk about that
was your first 12 months and that's a
great [clears throat] way of building a
lot of strength.
You know, if you're a gifted individual,
maybe that'll take you to 140 kg. If
you're of that kind of like 80 to 100 kg
body weight range, the heavier you are,
the stronger you are, the easier it is
to progress in strength. So, whenever
people say to me, "This is my number.
This is how much I can lift. Is that
good?" It's like, "Well, what's your
body weight?" And people say, "How long
does it take to get a certain level of
strength?" Well, what's your body
weight? That's one of the biggest
factors. That's why they have weight
classes in all of the strength
competitions. And usually the world
records in each consecutive weight class
is higher as the body weight goes up.
It's kind of logic, right? Anyway, so
let's get to that's the first 12 months
of your training. What are the rules? No
D loads. Press three times per week. Use
variation. So the main movements of the
day is going to be split up between
always. So throughout forever, if your
goal is bench press forever, you can at
least have one bench press session per
week, every week of the year, every year
of your life with this technique as long
as we're using other accessories as
well. So that's my recommendation and
that's why I've always done that. I've
always just benched every single week,
but then I add lots of different
variations. So the first year add the
variations of a barbell overhead press
and an incline barbell press. Now you're
probably wondering, is it just barbell?
What about dumbbells? Yes, yes, yes. Our
main movement of the day is barbell. And
my secondary exercise of every single
press day is a dumbbell variation, which
I'm about to do, but I'm still training
as well. So, don't neglect dumbbells. Of
course, do accessory exercises, train
arms, and do all those things as well.
And also train the opposing movement
patterns. So, make sure you're doing the
corresponding rows, pull-ups, or pull
downs. Now, let's talk about the next
six months. So, we're setting this up.
So, 12 months is those three variations.
Now, we're splitting up to the next six
months. This is where I want to say,
let's start adding in proactive D load.
What's a proactive D load? So,
one part of the D loads that we already
did was starting week one of every phase
with a conservative load. Now, after 12
months of really great training, you've
gotten to a point where you're probably
going to be able to lift heavy enough to
accumulate some type of fatigue. So, my
D load strategy is this week four of
every phase. So, let's just say I
mentioned it briefly before. Let's just
say, you know, what's your program? Four
sets of five or three sets of eight or
whatever it might be. On the final week,
we're pushing towards hitting close to
fail or even two fail. So, an RP 10 on
the on week four, the final week of our
program.
Now, what my recommendation is, which is
pretty fun, is the strategic de lo where
we have the volume. The reason why we
have the volume is because one of the
biggest contributing factors to fatigue
is the accumulation of volume.
more so than the accumulation of load,
right? So, you can still lift really
really heavy, but if you've reduced the
load, then that is usually a sufficient
start point for a D load strategy. And
then we can just pick up where we left
off on the new on week one of the new
phase and keep on moving forward. So,
after the first year, we're going to
start adding a D lo by having the volume
on the last week of every phase. Now,
the next change I recommend you
make if your goal is to get that 140
bench press is the next six months. So,
the first 12 months is three different
variations. The next 6 months
you're going to make two times a week
you're benching with that technique and
once is the accessory. So, the accessory
is going to be I'd say alternate between
one phase you do barbell overhead and
then the next phase you go incline and
you just alternate those. But the first
two sessions of every week, so two
sessions of every week, we are doing
that exact bench press technique. So you
don't just do the same session. You do
my recommendation is a heavier session
and a lighter session. That's what I've
always done, a heavier session and a
lighter session. But I never do more
than one heavy session per week. The
lighter session is not just about like
building muscle. So lighter weights and
and more reps so we build muscle. like,
yeah, okay, we might do that as well,
but it's more about kind of like not
going heavy every time you come into the
gym. Unloading, it's a little bit to do
with the strategy of intelligent
programming. So, we don't really need
whole weeks off. So, we don't need to
uh, you know, de load as frequently
because we haven't accumulated so much
fatigue to interfere with our
progression. So, that's how we
strategically and intelligently use
heavy weights all the time. Like every
week we're lifting heavy, but every
session isn't a heavy session, right?
So, one heavy bench, one light bench,
and then one accessory bench. So, that's
going to be the next 6 months of your
training. I'm going to do another set.
Okay, back to bench press. That set of
three, that was kind of like me feeling
it to say, do I go heavier or do I stay
on that weight? I think I'm going to
stay on this weight, but I'm going to do
a little bit more reps. So, three reps
had, you know, was a little bit too
easy. I'm going to go for five reps on
this next set.
Someone asked on a few episodes ago if
we live at some type of airplane base or
airport or whatever it was. We are about
10 minutes away from the airport and uh
lots of air we're right in line with the
flight path. So I don't know however
many minutes an airplane flies over the
top, but you guys hear it a lot. So I
apologize for that. But it's out of my
control now.
That's five. I'll do one more set.
[sighs] See, I'm at a point right now
where those reps, there's a rep in
reserve at least. And that's pretty much
how I train all the time. I very rarely
take my movements to fail. But there's a
very big difference between my level of
strength currently to my level of
strength in the first year in the first
two years and whatever as a beginner
when I wasn't able to bench press 140
kg. The heavier you go, it's not just
because [sighs] your muscles grow and
you get stronger. Of course, that
happens as well, but your coordination
and your ability to work harder improves
as well as you get more advanced. So,
this is called your intern intramuscular
coordination. So your ability to fire
more maximally improves, right? So just
because that's improved doesn't mean you
keep on training the same way. The rules
change as you get better. So as a
beginner, you know, I always say leave a
rep in reserve so the technique doesn't
break down. You really want to refine
that technique. But it's not because a
lot of people say don't train to fail as
a beginner because you don't want to
risk injury. I'll tell you now, as a
beginner, you're not lifting weights
heavy enough that it'll injure you,
[sighs]
right? [snorts]
So, a lot of the times when people say
beware of injury, uh, I get it. I get
the sentiment, but realistically now I'm
at a weight, so that's 160. Um, you
know, I'm I'm able to bench press. My my
recent PB, my recent max at 100 kg body
weight was 210 kg. So, I'm at more than
double body weight bench press, which is
really, really good. I'm not up at the
peak of my strength today. I wouldn't be
able to get 210, maybe 200, but you
know, I'm I'm at two times body weight
bench press. Now, those are weights that
can rip a peck off my bone. So,
therefore, that's another reason why as
you get better and better, the things
that got you from beginner to
intermediate isn't going to take you
from intermediate to advance. And that's
definitely not going to take you from
advanced to elite. So, right now, I'm at
a stage where I'm benching one. I still
always bench two times per week. Always.
Sorry, I shouldn't say bench two times a
week. I always do two pressing sessions
per week, but of those I probably only
go heavy, you know, once a week is a
heavy session. And even of those heavy
sessions, I'm not taking those to
failure all the time. I very rarely take
it to the point like the last time I
failed, I don't remember.
>> Seven, eight months ago,
>> seven, eight months ago was when I
actually put on a weight and I attempted
a rep that I couldn't actually press. A
lot of the times I'll put the bar down
in anticipation of I don't think I had
the next rep or you know I had a rep or
two in reserve. So those are the rules
as you get better and better. But you
know in these first couple of years, the
first year don't go to fail because I
want you to refine technique. The second
year every now and then and probably
more frequently work to the point where
you are getting close to fail. And if
you are hitting the point where you're
going to fail, make sure you have a
spotter. So even me, I have my
unrackcker. I know I'm not going to push
to the point where I'm going to need a
spot, but I say you are there for death
control. I very rarely have a need for
someone to, you know, help take the bar
off me, but just in case if this bar
slips out of my hands, I want a spotter
there. But the next thing is, check this
out. I have my face savers. So, make
sure when you're doing a bench press,
especially if you're working on your
hard sets, if you don't have a spotter,
at least have face savers. If you don't
have face savers, here's another
strategy and you're benching alone.
Don't put the clips on so that if you
fail, you can kind of like slide it off
and the weights will fall off the bar,
right? But I'll tell you now, it's it
can be dangerous going to fail. Um, but
that's the whole the truth of going to
fail, whether you should go to fail or
not. You're not going to injure yourself
in the first year of your training
because you're not lifting weights heavy
enough. But I want to refine technique
in the next year. Okay, we should be
pushing it where you can probably injure
yourself. Um, but at the very least,
always use a spotter on our heavy weeks
and on the second year. So, I've just
explained the next 6 months. So, the
first 12 months, three times pressing
and more variation. So, flat bench,
always incline, and overhead. The next 6
months, so that's is taking you to the
first year and a half. The next 6
months, we're doing two bench press
sessions per week and one accessory
press session. Remember, I'll always add
more accessories at the end of the
session. So, we're about to do that
next. I'm going to do my dumbbell
pressing. And on the third year,
this is where it's time to peak. And my
recommendation is if you are hellbent,
you want that 140 kg.
The best strategy is to bench press
three times per week. This technique,
one heavy session, one moderate session,
one light session. Don't go three heavy
sessions. It's probably going to be too
fatiguing to recover from. Change the
rep ranges. We still do our phases and
follow the exact same principle. So
phase one, we're doing a higher rep
range overall. The next phase, moderate
rep range. The next phase, that's when
we want to be peing our strength.
Anyway, there's a lot of information
there and I've given you guys so many
links and I hope you understand the
complexity of what it takes to actually
really master the bench press. And I've
only taken you to 140. So once you hit
140 kg which I believe you can do
naturally within those body weight
ranges. So between you know 80 to 100 kg
body weight if you're over 100 kg you
should definitely do it even faster time
than that. Okay if you follow this
strategy but within that weight range
that's kind of like the majority of the
males that I work with are within that
weight range. You can do that in the
first two years of your training and you
can do that naturally. Of course, eat
well. Have your protein. Two times your
body weight in grams of protein. Sorry.
And how how two times your body weight
in kilograms. Match that in grams of
protein. You know, eat your
carbohydrates. Understand what your
macros are and and fuel your body for
performance. Don't go on a calorie
deficit when your goal is to improve
your strength. Right? So, so follow all
of those rules. But you got to
understand I've just given you a very
very complex um you know formula for
achieving 140 kg bench press in the
first two years. And I've pointed to so
many of my links that give you all of
the different exercise tutorials, how
hard you should train, how to, you know,
set out your training over the long
term. But now you know
a lot of what I teach. If you guys have
any comments, put it in the comments
section. I do read the comments. And I'm
going to do my accessories now. I'm
going to show you how I do my shoulder
press.
>> Before you do that, there's a lot of
people asking if you do coaching. That's
why
>> of course I do coaching. It's what I do.
You know what? I'll leave the link as
well. Of course, I do coaching. I do I
have a generic program which is a
lowcost which is my strength system
online. Um and that's got a lot of the
programs that I do with all Bejönson.
And uh so I'll leave that link as well.
But I've also got customized coaching.
That's if you want to step it up and
that's where I customize your exact
program to suit you. So I'll put both of
those links in my bio, not in the bio,
in the description. You know what I
mean? And I hope you enjoyed that
session. 140 kg first 2 years. Yes, it's
possible. If you're lighter than, you
know, lighter than 80 kg, it's going to
be a lot harder. Doesn't mean it's
impossible. And if you do, then you're
elite. And I want you to comment in my
section that you're elite. Anyway, hope
you enjoyed. See you guys.
I said that I was ending the session,
but I got to show you this as well. When
I do dumbbells, here's something that's
really, really important is I use
accessory exercises to target joint
angles and muscles and ranges of motion
that I neglected in the main work. So
that's why when I do a barbell, I've got
a pronated grip. What I want to do is
hit the angles that I neglected. So one
of my favorite combos is a flat bench
with a seated dumbbell shoulder press.
And the way that I hold the dumbbells is
with a neutral grip. The neutral grip is
where you're kind of trying to get with
the barbell. You kind of want this
position, but the barbell is straight.
So we're forced into the pronated
position, but that's kind of the angle
that we really want it. So that's the
angle that I'm going to be using for the
dumbbells, right? So So check this out.
I'm going to do I'll do 50s,
which I don't want to do, but my
videographer said, you know, that's the
price you pay for wanting to be strong
is you have to lift heavy weight anyhow.
So,
something that I
I like to do with this
neutral grip. So that's how I'm kind of
sitting. Now you probably see me arching
and doing all these things. [sighs]
Yeah, I do arch. What I want to do is
arch my upper back so that I can
position my shoulder blades where they
need to go to push overhead. So a lot of
people say you need to be completely
vertical.
Well, [sighs and gasps]
kind of like it doesn't really what this
angle here does. Yeah, it does include
some upper chest, but it also is innate
of shoulder health. So, for me, my
shoulder health is I've got pretty tight
shoulders from years and years of
powerlifting. And that's just one of the
unfortunate parts about neglecting your
mobility work, which is what I did. So,
for me, that's the angle that I use for
overhead press. And I'll always
recommend some degree of thoracic
extension
to be able to position the shoulders
where they need to to press safely.
Anyway, you don't need to show this, but
I'm going to go do some rows now. So, I
guess you could say that's a horizontal
push to a vertical push. And my
accessories are a vertical pull to now a
horizontal pull. So, I'm going to pair
this with seated rows.
And then that's going to be my session.
Okay. So, good question. A lot of people
say, you know, you use your back in a
bench. Now, I don't know so much. I
think you use your back a lot to
position your body with a strong brace,
but they are not pushing muscles. Your
lats and and all that, they're not
pushing muscles. Lats play a role in
positioning your upper arm bone
correctly. So, it depresses the humorris
from the glenoid fossa. So, the ball in
the socket, the lats when it's on it, it
allows more room for the upper armb bone
to move freely in that shoulder capsule.
So there is a role with joint health to
have strong opposing muscles but they
are not prime movers. So anyone says use
your lats in a bench it's like not
really not really they are stabilizing
but something that I say is the best
benches in the world have strong muscles
in in their entire body. So a lot of the
times it's not just the prime movers
that we want to strengthen. You ever
heard of the term you're as strong as
your weakest link. So this is all in aid
of joint health is having strength
balanced strength surrounding 360°
surrounding that joint. So for me
I like to have a balanced amount of
strength and proportion because I want
to be strong on every single angle. But
when it comes to the bench press
objectively I think you can get away
with and I know you can get away with an
imbalance of strength. So in fact most
of the best benches have an imbalance of
strength. they have excessive strength
on their horizontal push plane and
they're not so strong everywhere else.
Whereas, if you look at me, I am quite
strong everywhere else. And that's just
how I've trained is to make sure that
there's no leakages of strength. So, the
exact science behind balance, I don't
think that there is anything that's
conclusive enough to say this is how it
must be because the research shows this.
The idea of structural balance was
taught to me by my early mentor Charles
Polloquin. May he rest in peace. And it
was just logical to me that I don't want
to have any weak points. So I'm not
going to back it by science. I'm going
to back back it by practical application
is build strength on every single angle
and [snorts] it's not going to make you
weaker of course. Um you know and that's
my science. That's my answer to do you
need a strong back? You know it probably
helps. Not as much as you would think.
It's not a prime mover but at the same
time you don't want to have a weak back.
All right, time to do sitting rows.
[cough]
[snorts]
[sighs]
>> [sighs]
>> Thank